Data Docs (#320)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/reading-data.qmd

::: {.panel-tabset .panel-pills}
### Polars LazyFrame
```python
df = pl.scan_csv(Path(__file__).parent / "test_data.csv")

# Example query
query_result = df.head(100).collect()
```

### Ibis
[Ibis](https://ibis-project.org/) provides a shared dataframe interface for a wide variety of backends, including DuckDB, Postgres, BigQuery, etc. Ibis uses a form of lazy evaluation by default, but it tends to be slower than Polars.

We'll use Postgres in the below example to demonstrate connecting to a remote data source.

```bash
pip install 'ibis-framework[postgres]'
```

```python
import ibis

con = ibis.postgres.connect(
    user="username",
    password="password",
    host="hostname",
    port=5432,
    database="database",
)
my_table = con.table("mytablename")

# This is when Ibis will perform your query operations
query_result = my_table.head(100)

```

### SQLAlchemy
SQLAlchemy allows for more fine-grained SQL usage with either plain SQL text execution or SQLAlchemy's own Object-Relational Mapping syntax, which allows you to use a similar syntax to Polars and Ibis.

SQLAlchemy is the most flexible method of all of these, but with this flexibility comes much greater complexity.

> #TODO: Add ORM example?

Author: Nope, no ORMs here

```python
from sqlalchemy import create_engine, text

# Note: You will need to also install psycopg2 (or specify another supported connector)
engine = create_engine('postgresql://user:password@hostname/database_name')
with engine.connect() as conn:
    result = conn.execute(text("SELECT * FROM tablename LIMIT 100"))
```
:::

> In both cases, we define our query (our data manipulations) and then rely on an external 'engine' to optimize it, run it, and provide us with the results.

Author: Be clearer here that we're reading into memory when we get the results

@render.data_frame
def results_df():
    # Use `.collect()` to get our result (in this case, getting the first 100 rows)
    return render.DataGrid(load_data_module.df.head(100).collect())
```

You might notice that the syntax has changed a little bit. We use `scan_parquet()` instead of `read_parquet` to return a Lazy Frame instead of a DataFrame. This means that when we import our data in the module, we're not actually loading it in yet.
Polars waits until it sees the `.collect()` to execute the sequence of commands to

1. Read in the data

2. Get the first 100 rows (`.head(100)`) and then

3. `.collect()` the results.

In this case, that's immediately since we're rendering the data frame as soon as we load the app.
However, there may be cases where you delay execution. For example, you might wait until after you've collected user-inputs or users have clicked a button.

Let's look at an example with the [The Weather Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/guillemservera/global-daily-climate-data).
This dataset is much, much bigger (nearly 28M rows) and so we'll take full advantage of Polars Lazy API to keep our app fast.

::: callout-note

> ### Modules and Laziness

Author: Is this clear? Want to make sure it makes sense where we're saying people have to do modules vs. not

Remember how before we had to put our data in a module? Now that we're only loading our data and querying when we need it (when we've called `.collect`), we don't need to worry about that!

If you're using the Lazy API or reading from a database, you can create that connection to your data in a module, or not. It's up to you.
:::

#### Example Application: Polars

> Here's a simple app that takes advantage of Polars Lazy API. In this example, we have the dataset on our computer, but we could also easily load from a shared, remote location using a tool like [Pins](https://rstudio.github.io/pins-python/) or a package like [boto3](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/code-library/latest/ug/python_3_s3_code_examples.html) to read from AWS S3.

Author: Is this enough of a Pins callout, or do we want an explicit example of this?

        .filter(pl.col("season").is_in(input.season()))
        .collect()
    )
    return render.DataGrid(results)

```

::: callout-note
### You can read from a database in Polars!
Polars can read from a databases too! It's important to note though that Polars essentially reads in the database table like a file, you'll still need to have it on disk (saved locally). For best results, try and scope down your initial query to pull the minimum data needed for your application and if you require many database queries and user inputs, consider a more sophisticated connector.

<details>
<summary>Show example code</summary>

```{.python filename="load_data.py"}
import polars as pl

uri = "postgresql://user:password@hostname/database_name"
# This is where you should scope down your query if you can.
query = "SELECT * FROM weather"

# Notice that this uses `read_*`.
# Polars cannot read the data lazily from the database, so this will load the entire query into memory.
# That's why we've put this into a module again.
data = pl.read_database_uri(query, uri)
```

```python
from shiny.express import ui, render, input
import polars as pl
from load_data import data

> # Notice that this uses `read_*`. Polars cannot read the data lazily from the database, so this will load the entire query into memory.

Author: Clarify this, it's not this line loading from the db, we already did that in load_data

## Best practices

Now that you have data in your application, it's worthwhile to consider reading up on a few topics. You might consider this article on [mutability](https://shiny.posit.co/py/docs/reactive-mutable.html). This is likely to come up as you store and update filtered datasets.

You might also consider visiting our sections on [reactivity](https://shiny.posit.co/py/docs/reactive-foundations.html) as you think about how filtering your dataset should affect your other outputs.

We also have numerous full examples and starter templates of dashboards using different datastores. We've sorted them into categories roughly corresponding to the tech stack at the bottom of this article.

## What about writing to a data store?

The scenarios we've covered above are focused on reading in data to an application and performing queries with user-inputs. If you need to *write* data to the database, this introduces additional considerations we'll cover in a separate article on persistant storage in Shiny apps.

> ### Example Applications {#read-data-examples}

Author: Thinking we put screenshots and links to these here. Thoughs?

::: {.panel-tabset .panel-pills}

> #### Polars

Author: Don't have one :( Maybe we build one?

> #### Polars

Author: Convert restaurant tips example?

```
:::

If you have a choice, we recommend using Polars' Lazy API over running queries against a database, as it is often simpler and faster. That said, there are certainly cases where a database is more appropriate or necessary.

### From a database

Some fantastic tools for lazy loading data from a database are [Ibis](https://ibis-project.org/) and [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/). With these tools, you can connect to practically any database and express data manipulations in Python (or SQL with SQLAlchemy). Your data manipulations are only executed when you call `.execute()`, similar to Polars' `.collect()`.

When using these tools, it's important to explicitly open and close the database connection to avoid connection leaks.

Here's an example using Ibis with a PostgreSQL database:

```bash
pip install 'ibis-framework[postgres]'
```

```python
import ibis
from shiny.express import render, session

# Connect to the database (nearly instant)
con = ibis.postgres.connect(
    user="username",
    password="password",
    host="hostname",
    port=5432,
    database="database",
)
dat = con.table("tablename")

# Cleanup connection when the session ends

> _ = session.on_ended(con.close)

Reviewer: It should be `session.on_ended(con.disconnect)`, not `session.on_ended(con.disconnect())`

from shiny.express import ui, render, input
from shiny import reactive

# Use `scan_*` instead of `read_*` to use the lazy API
dat = pl.scan_parquet("./daily_weather.parquet")

with ui.sidebar():
    ui.input_checkbox_group(
        "season",
        "Season",
        choices=["Summer", "Winter", "Fall", "Spring"],
        selected="Summer",
    )
    # Import just the unique city names for our selectize input
    cities = dat.select("city_name").unique().collect().to_series().to_list()
    ui.input_selectize("city", "City", choices=cities)

# Store manipulation in a reactive calc
# (convenient for writing once and using in multiple places)
@reactive.calc
def filtered_dat():
    return (
        dat
          .filter(pl.col("city_name") == input.city())
          .filter(pl.col("season").is_in(input.season()))
    )

# Display the filtered data
@render.data_frame
def results_df():
    return filtered_dat().collect()
```

#### Ibis (database)

```python
import ibis
from shiny.express import ui, render, input, reactive, session

# Connect to the database (quick, doesn't load data)
con = ibis.postgres.connect(
    user="", password="", host="", port=, database=""
)

> dat = con.table("weather")

Author: Same problem as the above example, even if corrected to `con.disconnect()`, disconnects immediately after initial connection

```python
import polars as pl
from shiny import reactive
from shiny.express import render

file = pathlib.Path(__file__).parent / "mtcars.csv"

@reactive.file_reader(file)
def read_file():
    return pl.read_csv(file)

@render.data_frame
def result():
    return read_file()
```

### From a database

If your data lives in a database, use [`reactive.poll()`](https://shiny.posit.co/py/api/express/reactive.poll.html) to periodically check if the data has changed and re-read it when it has.
With `reactive.poll()`, you're required to provide a function to check if the data has changed, which should be as efficient as possible.
Unfortunately, there is no universal way to check if data has changed in a database, so you'll need to implement this logic based on your specific use case.
In general, you might check a "last updated" timestamp column:

```python
import ibis
from shiny.express import reactive

con = ibis.postgres.connect(user="", password="", host="", port=, database="")
table = con.table("tablename")

def check_last_updated():
    return table.last_updated.max().execute()

# Every 5 seconds, check if the max timestamp has changed

> @reactive.poll(check_last_updated, interval=5)

Author: Corrected the interval here, also added a display and corrected the imports

## Reading data into memory {#read-into-memory}

A common pattern in Shiny apps is reading in data from a file on your computer, such as a CSV. We use an example CSV in the example below, but the strategy holds for other file formats you might want to use.

### Examples
::: {.panel-tabset .panel-pills}

### Polars
[Polars](https://pola.rs/) is an open-source library for data manipulation. It provides tooling to make data processing fast and intuitive. It is particularly helpful for large datasets, as its optimization engine can significantly speed up costly processes.

```python
df = pl.read_csv(Path(__file__).parent / "test_data.csv")
```

### Pandas
[Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) is one of the most widely used open-source data analysis libraries.

```python
df = pd.read_csv(Path(__file__).parent / "test_data.csv")
```

### DuckDB
[DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) is an open-source, in process database system which allows you to perform data analysis tasks quickly and with SQL syntax. Its memory usage optimizations make complex calculations quicker to run.

```python
df = duckdb.read_csv(Path(__file__).parent / "test_data.csv").df()
```
:::

> 

Author: Little note somewhere here like you can read it all now when things are small, but other strategies become more important when it's large

@render.data_frame
def results_df():
    results = df.filter(
        [df.city_name == input.city(), df.season.isin(input.season())]
    ).execute()
    return render.DataGrid(results)
```

This syntax should look pretty familiar! Polars and Ibis have similar syntax, but you'll notice we cue the execution of operations (filters, etc.) on our lazy tables using `.execute()` when we use Ibis.

## Best practices

Now that you have data in your application, it's worthwhile to consider reading up on a few topics.

[Reactive calculations](https://shiny.posit.co/py/api/core/reactive.calc.html#returns) allow us to perform calculations once, when inputs change, and propagate that change into outputs. For example, we could extract our filtering logic from the above application into a reactive calculation so it can be used across the application.

Note, this is using the Polars Lazy API version of the app.
<details>
<summary>Show example code</summary>

```python
from shiny.express import ui, render, input
from shiny import reactive
import polars as pl

df = pl.scan_parquet("./daily_weather.parquet")
ui.page_opts(title="Weather", full_width=True, id="page")

> ui.input_checkbox_group(

Author: Paste issue

    "season",
    "Season",
    choices=["Summer", "Winter", "Autumn", "Spring"],
    selected="Summer",
)

ui.input_selectize(
    "city",
    "City",
    choices=df.select("city_name").unique().collect().to_series().to_list(),
)

@reactive.calc
def result():
    result_df = df.filter(pl.col("city_name") == input.city())
        .filter(pl.col("season").is_in(input.season()))
        .collect()

    return result_df

# Create a checkbox input so our users can select one or all seasons
ui.input_checkbox_group(
    "season",
    "Season",
    choices=["Summer", "Winter", "Fall", "Spring"],
    selected="Summer",
)

# Create a multi-select input so users can select a city from those in our dataset
ui.input_selectize(
    "city",
    "City",
    choices=df.select("city_name").unique().collect().to_series().to_list(),
)

# Filter the data frame based on the user inputs above
@render.data_frame
def results_df():
    return render.DataGrid(result())

# Render some other output using `result()` dataframe
@render.data_frame
def results_df_2():
    return render.DataGrid(result().head(1))

# Render some additional outputs using `result()` dataframe
```

> </summary>

Author: Details in details, check this, it got weird

---
title: Reading data
editor:
  markdown:
    wrap: sentence
lightbox:
  effect: fade
---

> From CSVs to parquet files to cloud-hosted databases, if you can access it from Python, you can access it from Shiny. We won't go through every possible configuration here, but we'll choose a handful to explore. Our examples will start simple and build in complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From local files to cloud-hosted databases and beyond, if you can access your data from Python, you can also access it from Shiny. In this article, we'll cover some of our recommended ways to (efficiently) get data into your Shiny app.
```

```python
import polars as pl

DATA_BUCKET = "s3://my-bucket/data/"
STORAGE_OPTIONS = {
    "aws_access_key_id": "<secret>",
    "aws_secret_access_key": "<secret>",
    "aws_region": "us-east-1",

> }

Reviewer: Why are we including `STORAGE_OPTIONS` if we aren't using it anywhere? FWIW, I feel like since we link to Polars docs, we don't necessarily need to get into auth details
